welcome everyone hi um this is called
this talk monsters in the dark hunting
for the most extreme
galaxies in the universe um i i this is
a subject that's very near and dear to
my heart because
on the rare occasion i get to do some
science uh this is my
area of research so i think it's a i
find it very very fascinating
um it's i've called this talk searching
for the universe's most massive galaxies
and i think i'm just
just going to kind of set the scene i'm
assuming for this group i don't want to
belabor the point too much
uh but for for anyone that's not
familiar this is a galaxy galaxies are
these big clouds of
gas and dust and stars uh they are these
vast agglomerations of mata this is a uh
an
artist's impression of a very famous
galaxy uh the milky way
which is the galaxy we live in our milky
way is a pretty
impressive galaxy as always these things
go it's on the large side of things
galaxies are
anywhere from a few million stars maybe
on the low end
up to maybe a trillion stars on the high
end our galaxy is
a large-ish galaxy um somewhere between
200 billion and 400 billion stars in our
milky way
um for anyone familiar with monty
python's meaning of life
they have a galaxy song where they tell
you all about milky way and get all
their numbers exactly spot on which is
very nice
they describe the milky way as being a
hundred thousand light years
side to side and we are about here about
two-thirds of the way out
in one of these little spurs here
um for the longest time we thought uh
that the milky way was the only galaxy
in the universe obviously edwin hubble
around 100 years ago came along and
disabused us of that notion and since uh
the early 1920s we've been living in a
universe
where the milky way that you see on
screen here is just one
very kind of tiny speck and we live in
the middle of a whole zoo
of different galaxies of all kind of
shapes and sizes and colors
um we can look at some galaxies nearby
us this is andromeda
for example m31 a very popular
uh observing object this is m31 as seen
in the ultraviolet with the galaxy
satellite attribute so you can see all
the
very very young hot blue stars
highlighted here in the uv
um andromeda is a pretty similar galaxy
to our milky way they're both what we
call these grand design
spirals um for the longest time we
thought andromeda was a bit bigger than
our milky way
and now the massive andromeda has been
revised downwards a bit and the mass of
the milky way's been revised upwards a
little bit so now we think that
andromeda and the milky way are
more cosmic more kind of like cosmic
twins than we
previously thought um so the andromeda
galaxy is about two and a half million
light years away it's our nearest
neighbor big galaxy
and we can kind of zoom out yes again
and have a look at our little slice of
the universe so this is the local group
of galaxies
and you can think of it as our little
cosmic backyards
so here you have the milky way and here
you have andromeda this is uh this is
kind of pre
uh finding that milky way and andromeda
are kind of comparable in size so you
can see the drawn andromedas being a bit
bigger
and the interesting thing is that beyond
the grand spirals beyond the milky way
and andromeda you can see
uh like the little fluffy triangulum
galaxy this is a what's called a
flocculant spiral galaxy
then also these little dwarf galaxies
including the the small and large
magellanic clouds these dwarf galaxy
satellites of our milky way
and the point i really want to highlight
is that there is an absolute zoo of
galaxy types
um i think if you ask a member of the
general public to imagine a galaxy that
will typically think of a
you know a grand design spiral not just
similar to the milky way but there are
all kinds of things that we call
galaxies there are little irregular
galaxies like the magellanic clouds
there are fluffy spirals there are
regular spirals there's a whole array of
galaxy types
there is one galaxy type however that we
don't have in our local group
and that's just because they're very
rare like the average spatial density of
this galaxy type
is low enough that in any given kind of
cosmic backyard like this one
you're unlikely to have one and those
are the giant
elliptical galaxies uh they're not quite
as visually impressive as many of the
other types um
spiral galaxies are a favorite target of
stargazers for a reason right and
these elliptical galaxies tend to look
like fairly boring blocky
blobby egg shaped things uh this one is
m87
um it's a very very massive galaxy um
but it looks like a very boring
blobby egg-shaped thing um the
like i said it's a very massive galaxy
these giant ellipticals are remarkable
for their size
and their their stellar mass like the
number of stars they contain
uh on this scale this is how big our
milky way galaxy would be
so you can remember i said at the start
the milky way galaxy is a pretty
big galaxy as these things go a hundred
thousand light years across
it's completely dwarfed by m87 and m87
um is just absolute giant of a galaxy
that would dwarf anything inside of our
local group
they get even bigger as well this is
ic1101 which
uh is one of the biggest galaxies in the
universe it's the biggest galaxy we've
ever found
again it's not that much to look at um
it's it's an agglomeration of
gravitationally bound stars without much
kind of structure in it so it looks a
bit like a boring blob of light
but again this is absolutely remarkable
but remarkable because of its sheer size
and this is a cartoon of it it's it's
not quite
accurate unfortunately but this is a
cartoon that appeared in newspapers when
we discovered ic1101
giving the idea that it's around six
million light years in diameter
you can see it is much much larger than
m87 and the milky way andromeda kind of
vanished into nothingness when compared
to ic1101
six million light years across is a
ridiculous size right it's big enough to
swallow
the milky way and andromeda and all of
the space in between it's an absolute
galactic
giant so these giant ellipticals are
fascinating for astronomers
uh for a couple of reasons i mean first
of all because of their sheer
size right i mean it's uh it was
something of a challenge
in galaxy evolution to understand how
such a massive
amount of stars could all come to be
dwelling in the same place
they're also very interesting from a
galaxy evolution point of view because
these massive elliptical galaxies are
all
dead galaxies so just to explain what
that means um
normal galaxies like the milky way
are constantly forming stars right so
here comes excuse me normal galaxies
down the milky way are constantly
forming stars right so
our milky way forms a handful of new
stars per year they take
gas which is the raw material for star
formation and process that
into stars that's the the kind of like
the heartbeat of galaxies life right
taking gas
and turning it into stars virtually
every galaxy is doing this andromeda is
making one or two new stars per year the
milky way is making kind of three or
four new styles per year
uh the imaginary clouds are making new
stars it's completely normal process for
galaxies
but these massive elliptical galaxies
are what we call
red and dead they're not doing this
they're not doing much at all in fact
they're just sitting there
being relatively boring they're not
making any new stars
so yeah we say they're dead galaxies
because they're not forming new stars
and we say they're red galaxies and
that's because they haven't formed any
stars for so long
all of the stars have died out apart
from the old
red stars um any kind of young hot blue
stars would have died out
billions of years ago right so as best
as we can tell these giant elliptical
galaxies
have not had any significant star
formation activity for
billions and billions of years they're
essentially relics
of the early universe and to be an
astronomer
coming across one of these red and dead
galaxies is essentially like being a
paleontologist coming across a dinosaur
skeleton or something right if you're
digging around in the desert and you
find something like this it would tell
you that there is
or telling that there would have had to
have been some extraordinarily large
creature
living in the past and you have just
kind of come across
its remains for an astronomer coming
across one of these massive elliptical
galaxies
these are the dinosaur skeletons of the
universe right it's telling you that
there must have been some
extraordinarily massive galaxy
forming in the in the distant past that
has left behind this kind of
dead remains of a galaxy
so what we want to do is go and look
back in time and
find our dinosaurs and see if we can
tell what
kind of process has like formed one of
these enormous dead galaxies
um i imagine you will all be familiar
with the idea that astronomers have
an advantage over uh archaeologists that
we can actually look back in time right
the further away we look in the universe
the further
we're looking back in time so the sun is
about eight minutes away and so we're
seeing eight minutes back in time when
we see
sunlight and things in our milky way
galaxy
might be tens of thousands of light
years away so we're seeing
tens of thousands of years back in time
when we look around our galaxy
and then when we look around our local
group we're seeing millions of years
back in time right so
light from andromeda has taken two and a
half million years to reach us so we're
seeing two and a half million years back
in time
the problem is is that even millions of
years is pretty small potatoes compared
to the age of the universe the universe
is 13.7 billion
years old 13 000 million years old right
and so
going back merely millions of years
isn't really going to cut it if we want
to look into the deep
past of the universe so we want to look
really really really far away
and see if we can catch these behemoth
galaxies in the act of forming
one of the best looks into the early
universe we've ever got has was taken by
the hubble space telescope
it's called the hubble deep fields and
it's this absolutely it's very very tiny
patch of sky
just uh off the uh the end of ursa major
um it's about 12th the diameter of the
full moon or that
i tell children it's a about a quarter
the size of your pinky fingernail if you
hold it arm's length against the sky
just to give you an idea of what a
minuscule patch of sky
this is so this uh this frontier field
uh taken with the hubble space telescope
was one of the
the pioneering science projects that the
telescope did when it was first launched
it took it chose the patch of sky just
off the end of versa major because it
was particularly empty right there's a
very low dust obscuration
from the foreground milky way and so it
provides a very nice
unimpeded and obscured look back into
the very early universe
and after about three weeks of
integrating uh
so like a three week long long exposure
photo hubble
took this photo uh this is one of my
favorite photos of all time it's the
hubble deep fields
um everything in this picture is a
galaxy and that's why it's extraordinary
it kind of
it looks like a starry night to start
with but then you have a bit of a
perspective shift and realize that every
single point of light
um except for the yeah there's a couple
here which are foreground stars in the
milky way but apart from these two
bright things
everything in here is a galaxy there's
about 10 000 galaxies
uh in this picture alone and there's
everything from
nearby galaxies you can see some of the
like the largest spiral things are
recognizable galaxies so they are
fairly nearby but even this this thing
almost
noise you can see in the photo with
these tiny little specks off of you know
on the
the very distance these are galaxies
that are right across the other side of
the whole universe right these are the
some of the earliest galaxies
formed around 12 billion years ago
so this picture provides an excellent uh
like kind of vertical slice of the
universe if you like you can see
everything from
fairly late time galaxies are mature and
fully formed and then you can see
in these very very faint little dots you
can see these very tiny baby galaxies i
think this one here is a particularly
ancient one this red dot
you can see it's very bright red because
the light has been very strongly
redshift so this is a real relic of the
early universe down there
um the problem is is that when
astronomers look at this picture and
when we study these very early galaxies
there's nothing that is remotely big
enough or powerful enough
to leave behind one of these massive
elliptical galaxies
so these elliptical galaxies are some of
the biggest galaxies there are right
they might contain a trillion
stars and to form that many stars
in a relatively short space of time
would in it it would be a cosmic
fireworks show right it's a huge amount
of energy in style formation
any one of these things forming should
just be absolutely lighting up the sky
and shining out like a beacon from the
early universe
but there's essentially nothing there
all of the early galaxy
all of the early universe galaxies we
see
uh in this picture and in other similar
pictures are
relatively puny and the kind of things
that would leave behind
you know like a milky way at best
so uh the question is where are these
things i mean these giant literal
galaxies evidently
exist we can see them in the universe
around us but their progenitors seem to
be missing in the early universe
um so that is a bit of a puzzle um the
the answer to the puzzle uh relies on
the wavelength of light that we're
looking in
so the hubble deep field is a optical or
essentially optical picture i think
there's some very very near infrared and
some
uh near uv thrown in there as well which
is it's essentially optical lights
um so the the question is what about
other wavelengths can we use other
wavelengths of lights to potentially
find what might be hidden in this
picture
um the answer is yes obviously otherwise
i wouldn't be telling you this
long wavelength light in particular is
very very good for finding hidden things
and revealing hidden information if you
look in the
infrared for example you can see
information that's not apparent there in
in the optical like looking at two
glasses
and knowing that one of them contains
hot water and one of them contains cold
water it's
so the switching to long wavelength
light is bringing you more information
than is apparent in the visible
um it's also very good for finding
obscured things this is a picture
of some bushes uh switching to the same
view in the infrared
you can see a person is standing in the
bushes and this is why
uh police teams when they're searching
for fugitives go in with
infrared goggles they can see people
hiding in the bushes or
firefighters for example going into
burning buildings
or they use infrared goggles to
penetrate the
the gas and the smoke and the dust and
see
the people kind of hiding inside so as a
general rule
long wavelength light is a very very
useful tool for
seeing through obscuring material and
revealing uh
what is really there underneath uh the
long wavelengths i'm going to be talking
about
in this talk are what we call the sub
millimeter so the sub millimeter is
is technically the area of the
electromagnetic
spectrum of where the wavelength is
around a millimeter or so
so this is the electromagnetic spectrum
that we all know and love from school
you can see this is the visible part of
the spectrum here and then
stepping to longer wavelengths we have
the infrared before we hit the
microwaves and the radio
sub millimeter light is basically as far
as the infrared goes it's
where the boundary of the infrared
really rubs up against the microwave and
the radio part of the spectrum so it's
basically maximally
infrared light um submillimeter light is
very very useful and very interesting
for observing the universe as i'm going
to explain in a moment
um what we use to observe sub-millimeter
light it's a kind of a detector called a
balometer um so if you're observing
in the optical you say u10 we tend to
use ccds
which are the same thing that powers
your camera phone
we can't use a ccd in in the the long
wavelength because the physics of the
photons
that are very low energy just don't work
in the same way with ccd materials
so we have to use something called a
balometer
um balometers have a a long and storied
history uh the
the word bolometer means measure of
known things which is one of the most
useless
uh etymologies i've ever come across
they were invented by an astronomer in
the 1870s a guy called samuel pierpoint
langley
came up with the first design for a
volometer this device for sensing very
very long wavelength radiation
um it's based on the idea that
resistance in a circuit is a function of
temperature right so you build a little
circuit in your in your instrument and
then
if you have long wavelength radiation
which is essentially heat radiation
right coming through
it will warm up your circuit and you get
a little resistance spike and then that
will tell you that you've detected
some very very long wavelength photons
um the uh the first outing of a
volometer was very auspicious uh samuel
langevi was able to detect
a cow uh just purely from thermal
radiation at a distance of about a
quarter of a mile
which kind of sounds faintly ridiculous
but he's actually remarkably impressive
if you think about it
essentially a remote thermometer from
400 meters away he was able to detect
the heat uh radiating off of a living
creature
so this is a balometer essentially a
heat a heat sensing device a uh a
kind of directional thermometer for
sensing very long wavelength radiation
the reason they weren't used for
astronomy for a very long time
was because until the 1990s belometers
were all
single pixel devices right they were
invented way back in 1878
but there's a reason we didn't start
pointing them in the sky straight away
and that's because they were all single
pixel things and
mapping the sky with a single pixel
single pixel instrument is
essentially impossible right imagine how
much of a nightmare it would be to have
to
use your camera phone with one pixel and
build up a picture of something
um the breakthrough came when we learned
how to
multiplex volometers together with
superconductors and
stick several kilometers together each
acting like individual pixels to make a
volometer array
that could act essentially like a crude
camera
the the first widely successful example
was called
scuba scuba meaning these uh the
sub-millimeter common user
volometer array which was mounted here
on the james clark maxwell telescope on
the summit of monacai in hawaii
scuba completely transformed astronomy
it was the
first look in this whole new wavelength
regime
uh into space you know there have been
several revolutions in astronomy where
we've managed to get an entirely new
wavelength to look into the sky right
we've been doing visual astronomy for
thousands of years uh
people like rieber and jansky invented
radio astronomy in the 30s and 40s and
that was an entirely new way of looking
at the universe
when we developed infrared astronomy and
went to space in the 1970s
again that was an entirely new way of
looking at the universe
and this is another one i think the
scuba and the ability to study the sky
in these
millimeter wavelengths was a revolution
in astronomy
uh this is scuba itself um
it's a you still still a far cry from
the millions of pixels that we have in
our phone cameras there are 37
uh balloometers multiplexed together
inside scuba you can see it looks like
this little honeycomb thing
each one of these tubes is an individual
volometer
so 37 you know again it's not quite the
kind of 10 megapixel camera you might
wish for but still
37 is a lot more than one and so with
this you can actually start to take
pictures of the sky um
i will say no normally i would do a show
of hands if we were doing this in person
i'll just have to pretend
um i'm always keen to know who has heard
of scuba because it's not very well
uh known outside kind of enthusiastic
circles
um people are often surprised when i
tell them that in terms of citation
rates
um if you kind of count all the papers
that have come as a result of a
particular instrument and count their
citations
scuba is the second most successful
astronomical instrument of all time
second only to the hubble space
telescope um so you know think of the
amount of press that hubble gets
and scuba this one little 37 pixel long
wavelength camera is second
to the hubble space telescope in terms
of the impact it's had on astronomy it's
a very very important instrument
um and that's what i just said 37 blocks
is all linked together to actually image
in millimeter wavelengths
uh so when we built scuba in the late
1990s the first thing we wanted to do
wants to image uh the sky and kind of
replicate known things particularly this
hubble deep fields
one of the first projects that went
ahead with scuba was to do a scuba
deep fields to take this same patch of
sky that had been observed by hubble
and observe it with scuba observe it in
these long wavelengths
to see what we could see i'm going to
show you now the results
of scuba vs hubble so believe it or not
this is the same patch of sky so on the
left we have the hubble deep field
um as seen by hubble and then on the
right we have a mirrored identical bat
excuse me we have a mirrored identical
patch of sky
as it is seen by scuba um so
it looks first of all it looks very
different um it looks a lot less pretty
it
looks like a kind of ugly blobby mess uh
when you look at these pictures it
becomes
maybe a bit obvious why scuba doesn't
have the press attention that hubble has
um it tends to observe blobby things uh
rather than
kind of nice very sharply defined
pictures and the blobbiness is simply a
function of the resolution of the camera
these
the wavelengths that scuba is observing
are a million times longer
than optical wavelengths and so um yeah
so you
the resolution of your images is
necessarily going to be like a million
times worse basically
um so yeah so that that being that once
you've got over your shock about how
kind of blobby and ugly the picture
looks you can start noticing some very
very interesting things here
in particular what's really noticeable
is that the bright things in scuba
do not correlate with the bright things
in hubble at all
take this one this is known as hdf1 the
brightest thing in the scuba d
fields if you look at the hubble deep
field where hdf1 is
there's essentially nothing there this
is a zoom in of the patch of sky where
the brightest scuba sources
and this is where the scuba sauce is and
there's nothing particularly notable
there in hubble
uh it would be one thing if they're very
bright scuba things lined up with the
very bright hubble things and that would
make sense because
the bright galaxies are just dumping
energy out of all wayfriends
but it seems to be that there's
something in this patch of sky that is
uh generating vast amounts of very very
long wavelength radiation
but is completely missing in the optical
image
um so what are these things this is the
first question of what so they are
galaxies um they are emitting lots of
long wavelength lights
but they're not showing up in optical
images
uh one of the first questions you can
ask is how far away are these things
um are they you know relatively local
universe phenomenon are they a bit more
distant
um there's i want to do a bit of a bit
of a sidetrack at this point because
there is something very interesting
about this submillimeter
which lets you observe very very very
distant things
uh in a way that's much easier than to
add shorter wavelengths
uh this gets called sub millimeter magic
astronomers and scientists don't use the
word magic lightly this really is a
very very nice effect um so
the the fact the effect is this um
galaxies observed in the submillimeter
don't obey the normal distance
brightness relationship
so a normal uh a normal galaxy or a
normal object follows what we call the
inverse square law so as the galaxy gets
more and more and more distant
through space the brightness of this
galaxy will drop
according to the square of the distance
right so you put your galaxy twice as
far away
it will get four times fainter put a
galaxy ten times farther away you will
get a hundred times fainter
galaxies observed in the sub millimeter
don't do this they stay exactly the same
brightness across a
huge range of range of distance which
means that the submillimeter is an
amazing way to probe the very very
distant universe right
in the optical things that are nearby
are bright and things that far away are
very very faint indeed
in the submillimeter things that are
nearby are bright
and things that are very very far away
are bright as well
um i want to explain how this actually
works because this at first glance this
is fairly baffling it seems like
these submarines galaxies are defying
the fundamental laws of physics right
this seems
uh almost impossible so i just wanted to
take a moment to explain how this works
it's quite neat
um to explain how this works i want to
introduce this idea of a spectrum which
i imagine a lot of people here will
be familiar with the idea is say
essentially a graph of brightness
against wavelength right so you have
brightness on this up and down y axis
and then wavelength
on this bottom x-axis down here and
you'll notice the wavelength here is
fairly short this is this is just an
optical spectrum of a galaxy we can step
back a bit
and uh look at the the we can step back
a bit and graph the brightness of a
galaxy
across the entire electromagnetic
spectrum
this is something called a spectral
energy distribution
so it's the it's the idea of a spectrum
but just stepping back and just looking
at the galaxy across the entire
em spectrum and seeing how bright it is
at this across this massive
range of wavelengths so this is a real
galaxy uh this is arp 220 i think one of
the uh
very kind of bright uh unusual galaxies
in the local universe
it's brightness on this y-axis and then
wavelength on this x-axis down here
um the x-axis is logarithmic so you have
this enormous range in wavelength
um like a factor of 10 million between
the left and the right
and we can actually just try to chop
this up into the more familiar parts so
this
left bit down here is showing you the uv
an optical so the galaxy is
pretty faint in the far uv and gets
brighter and brighter and brighter and
it's reasonably bright in the optical
it's about the same brightness in the
near infrared as it is in the obstacle
and this far infrared it gets very very
bright right so this big kind of kind of
hump here
this is the the spec this is the
signature of cold dust in this galaxy
this very very bright hump so
this galaxy is hugely bright in the far
infrareds then this is the sub
millimeter down here this slope
downwards and then this
long wavelength tail is the radio
so you can see um the there's a lot
going on here and the
the shape of the galaxy's spectral
energy distribution will tell you a lot
about
what is going on with that galaxy so
what i want to do now is
to simulate the effect of moving this
galaxy
further and further back through the
universe and so and we can see what
happens to the brightness of different
wavelengths
um so there's two effects when you move
an object further and further away
through the universe
first of all it's going to get dimmer
obviously that's basic physics you can't
get around the fact that if something
gets further away it gets dimmer
so the first effect is that as the
galaxy gets more and more distant it's
going to get dimmer and dimmer and
dimmer
the second effect is of course redshift
right we live in an expanding universe
and so a a when you move a galaxy
further and further away it's going to
pick up more and more and more speeds
due to the expansion of the universe and
so it's going to get
more and more and more red-shifted
that's why very distant objects in the
universe
have these very very large redshifts and
what a redshift means it's a shift
towards
longer wavelengths right so the spectrum
is going to shift to the right
so these are the two effects that we're
playing with when you move this galaxy
further out into the universe it's going
to get dimmer go downwards in this plots
and it's going to get redshifted move
right in this plots
okay so you can actually do this and so
this is i've taken this galaxy and i've
moved i'm going to move it further and
further and further and further away
so the the black one is fairly nearby
and the blue and the the
kind of turquoise and the green they get
progressively further away until we
reach
this red one which is very very far away
indeed
and so we can we can imagine that we're
observing these galaxies you know so
imagine that we have six different
galaxies right nearest to farthest away
and we're observing them if we observe
them in the optical so they remember
this bit down here
you can see it behaves fairly sensibly
you get the nearest one is brightest
and then they get fainter and fainter
and fainter and fainter as they get
further away
if you observe them in the radio you see
the same thing the nearest one is very
bright and they get fainter and fainter
and fainter and fainter and fainter
as they get further away everything is
behaving very sensibly
in the sub millimeter though something
very interesting happens
and to start with you you do get a bit
of a drop right to the nearest one
and as you move away it drops a little
bit then after a little while
with distance the galaxy doesn't get any
fainter all these lines start
overlapping
and that's because these two different
effects the dimming effect and the
redshift effect are actually cancelling
out because
as the galaxy gets redshifted more and
more and more
the brightest bit of the galaxy spectrum
is getting redshifted
into your observing band remember this
very very bright
hump in the fire infrared that's all the
cold dust in this galaxy
as a galaxy gets red-shifted you're
observing an intrinsically brighter part
of the galaxy spectrum
and that completely undoes the effect of
dimming
right so you move the capacity twice as
far away it gets four times dimmer
but then you're observing a part of the
spectrum that is intrinsically four
times brighter and the
galaxy you see stays exactly the same
brightness
um it is this is amazing thing these two
effects just march completely in
lockstep in opposite directions
so across this vast range of distances
galaxies are exactly the same brightness
this is a normal galaxy this is a kind
of brightness versus distance cartoon
in a normal galaxy it will do something
like this observed in the submillimeter
galaxies do something like this
so across this enormous range in
distance galaxies
observed in this particular
sub-millimeter band where the
wavelengths of light are around a
millimeter
galaxies stay exactly the same
brightness and that makes the
submillimeter the best possible tool for
studying the early universe
if you are an optical astronomer or a
radio astronomer
and you want to study very very very
distant objects you
are struggling to find individual
photons
um when you hear these uh results when
people find the most distant ever galaxy
in the optical
it's something a redshift you know
richie of 10 or something you know when
the universe was
half a billion years old or so those
observations are made
based on one or two or a handful of
photons
observed in the sub millimeter though
things just stay exactly
the same brightness we can study the
early universe
just as easily as we can study the
relatively
nearby universe with a sufficiently
sensitive submission millimeter
observation
you can essentially see everything that
there is to see back to the very start
of the universe
the submillimeter is the most amazing
tool for understanding uh the early
early universe um of course there's a
downside
uh brightness being independent of
distance uh
means that there's no actual way to tell
what the distance is right
if you if you're observing in the
optical or you see something very faint
um then it stands to reason that's far
away in the submillimeter a bright blob
could be relatively nearby
or it could be uh very very distant
across
the other side of the universe um this
took a bit of cleverness to get around
which i
i can talk about in the questions if you
like but i think it's a bit of a side
track
uh basically we had to work out a way of
locating the the
actual position of these things inside
the fuzzy blob so we could take a
spectrum of them
and really pinpoint their redshifts
um but my my main point is that
observing at least a millimeter
wavelength is a fantastic way to find
these very very
distant galaxies and when we
observe when we actually measure the
redshifts of these new galaxies remember
the whole point was that we turned
scuba on this new uh submillimeter
observation facility
and we found all these sub-millimeter
bright blobs that didn't correlate to
anything
that we saw in the optical um they are
very very very distant indeeds uh they
are all
uh they live between in astronomical
language they live between redshift
two and redshift six which is in
essentially anything from eight to 12
billion years in the past and
just to kind of put that in context if
we draw out a timeline of the universe
being about 14 billion years old the
earth formed about five
billion years ago this is where our
hidden galaxies live
they really really are some of the first
big galaxies
ever formed they live with these
extraordinarily high redshifts
um we're looking at the liver you know
when the universe was about five percent
of its current age
so i i'm assuming you have all guessed
the punchline at this point right but of
course these
we've found this new population of
galaxies that were completely hidden
before right these galaxies were
completely invisible
before we turned this new submillimeter
telescope on and discovered them
they are very very distant they are very
energetic they're pumping out huge
amounts of energy in the seven
millimeter and they only live in the
early universe
they are the perfect match to explain uh
these massive red dead ellipticals that
we see in today's universe so
essentially we've found our dinosaurs
right we've found our kind of cosmic
uh ancestors of these massive
ellipticals
um so we call these galaxies sub
millimeter galaxies
i wish this was a photo of a seven
millimeter galaxy obviously it's not
it's an artist's impression
um the word submits it it feels a bit
strange calling them sub millimeter
galaxies because that kind of calls to
mind something that's pretty tiny
uh these submillimeter galaxies are
anything but tiny they are the biggest
and the baddest and the most extreme
galaxies in the universe um what makes
them so extreme
is really the rate that they're forming
stars remember that these
seven millimeter galaxies are the
ancestors of massive
ellipticals right uh so these are
essentially
uh the they have to result in a trillion
stars or something being formed
a seven millimeter galaxy is essentially
the biggest star formation cosmic
fireworks show
in the universe they can easily have
star formation rates of
thousands of stars per year which just
absolutely
dwarfs anything that we will see in the
universe around us
um just to put this in some kind of
context the milky way forms a handful of
stars per year
a galaxy that we think of as a local
starburst galaxy something like m82
or r220 or something might form 50 or
100 stars per year
a submillimeter galaxy can easily form
thousands
of stars per year they in terms of the
their efficiency of their star formation
and just the number of stars they're
churning out
they completely dwarf anything in the
local nearby universe they are the
biggest and the most efficient factories
for stars
in the entire universe um
the having time okay let's get one more
thing so the
these things are interesting for a
couple of reasons firstly they're
interesting because
they are the you know the biggest the
most extreme star formation environments
in the universe which is fascinating in
itself they're also
really fascinating fascinating for
astronomers because they really throw a
spanner in the works
for galaxy evolution theories um the
real
issue that we're trying to solve is how
do you get a galaxy to form stars
that fasts it's quite difficult in terms
of our like theoretical understanding to
work out
how you can get a galaxy to form
thousands of stars
per year year after year after year
um to give you a flavor of the argument
um
i've got obviously stars are made from
gas right so this very very high star
formation rate
must mean that there is a huge amount of
gas living in these galaxies
to fuel this massive starburst and so
one of the
one of the questions is where does this
gas come from how do we fuel this
starburst
two main ideas are maybe you could crash
two galaxies together
and even in the local universe when you
merge two galaxies together that
triggers a huge starburst and so maybe
if you take two very very massive very
gas-rich galaxies in the early universe
and crash them together
that could maybe fuel uh some kind of
enormous starburst that we're seeing
uh alternatively maybe rather than
crashing two galaxies together maybe you
could just have a single galaxy but you
could just throw gas at it
uh the galaxy might sit at the
intersection of some cosmic filaments
that are like
giant kind of cosmic waterfalls of gas
that just pour
gas down onto the galaxy uh because of
the galaxy's kind of gravitational
potential
um these are two different ideas for how
one of these galaxies might actually
function
neither of them really work though
there's a serious problem with both of
these things
um first of all this idea of crashing
two galaxies together
this kind of works in theory uh this is
uh an image taken from a supercomputer
simulation
of two of these submillimeter galaxies
so it's perfectly possible to build a
little box of universe
inside a computer and take two massive
gas-rich galaxies and crash them
together and generate
something that looks like a
sub-millimeter galaxy
it works in theory the problem is from
cosmological simulations and this video
never works i'm really sorry
um uh i forget the video so
we have these cosmological simulations
like the millennium simulation or
illustrious
that some of you might be might be
familiar with when we look at these
simulations
they give us a very very good idea of
how structures form in the early
universe
and how common it is for galaxies to
crash together
and everything we learn from simulations
that are tuned very carefully to
replicate the universe as we know it
these simulations tell us that merging
galaxies should be reasonably rare
at least these very kind of massive
major mergers
but submillimeter galaxies are
everywhere right we they are a lot more
common than the simulations say they
should be
so saying that these submillimeter
galaxies are all all these two
massive galaxies crashing together
doesn't really works it contradicts
something that we know
from simulations which is that mergers
are reasonably rare
an alternative idea is that you can drop
the whole merger thing and say that
at least some millimeter galaxies are
powered by inflows right
again this is a computer simulation of
what one of these might look like you
have a
relatively normal galaxy and then you
have these cosmic filaments
where cold pristine gas kind of rains
down onto the galaxy
and fuels this kind of extreme starburst
um an issue with this of course um is
that
uh stars push back a little bit so
anyone that's seen the northern lights
will be familiar with the the idea of
the solar wind right
there's a wind that blows from the sun
and strikes the earth's magnetosphere
and we see that as the
aurora borealis forming thousands and
thousands of new stars
every single year the combined force of
those winds
and young stars from the just formed
have particularly strong winds
the combined force of thousands of new
stars per year being formed
should be enough to blow all of the gas
out of the galaxy
there's a it's like it's like a negative
feedback thing there's an intrinsic
pressure valve
to this kind of star formation where
you're just throwing gas into galaxy
which is if you start forming stars too
fast the galaxy just blows all the gas
away and then the star formation is
going to drop
so again this doesn't seem like it's the
solution
um it's quite hard to solve this problem
most of the theoretical ideas for house
smg's submitted which galaxies really
work
don't do a good job of explaining the
observations that we see
one real problem uh is that is caused by
how hard it is to see these things
um at the current time uh our best image
of an actual person enemy galaxy looks
something like this
um that's because even though these
things are bright
because of this millimeter magic that
keeps things very very bright
all the way through the early universe
they're still far away and so they're
still
small when we're observing them with a
wavelength a million times longer than
optical light
and so that makes the resolution a very
very hard thing to chase
so one of this this is a sub millimeter
galaxy uh
living in the early universe it's very
hard to see what's going on here right
compared to optical studies where we get
these very very nice pictures
where we can fully uh kind of dissect
and diagnose what's going on inside the
galaxy
um so what we might have to wait until
the next generation of instrumentation
um it's going to be a while to get
anything that looks as nice as this but
luckily we do have two
instruments on the very near horizon
that are designed for long wavelength
study
uh the james webb space telescope is the
successor to hubble
um is fingers crossed fingers crossed
launching next year
and that's going to carry with it a
suite of infrared instruments
that are going to be able to study
galaxy formation in the early universe
better than ever before
and also the square kilometer array uh
which is going to be coming online
gradually over the next decade
which is a a radio facility with a
sensitivity and a resolving power that
almost seems like science fiction it's
going to be an absolute enormous leap
forward in terms of
radio studies of the universe so and as
of right now submittability galaxies are
a bit of an
enigma they are some of the massive uh
most massive most extreme
to me the most interesting galaxies in
the universe and it's not quite clear
how they function or how they fit
into our models of galaxy evolution
so i'm looking forward with great
anticipation to the next generation of
instrumentation that will hopefully find
us some answers
and that is where i'm going to stop